---
title: 'Psychology as a congregation of subjects'
date: 2017-09-02
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---
Basically, psychology is the congregation of philosophy and biology.

While the biological aspect consists of scientific research, the philosophical aspect revolves heavily around introspection and inner reflection.

Psychology was first thought about by the Greeks. They thought up philosophies which can be related to psychology, birthing the subject altogether. Then, the Germans were the first to recognize psychology as a subject in itself. Early “psychologists” didn’t even consider themselves psychologists. For instance, Herman von Helmholtz considered himself a physicist.

The thing about psychology is that it derives its contents from VAST topics in science and philosophy. Psychology is related to physics(neural transmission rate can be calculated-which is what Helmholtz did), Biology (the study of the brain and various behaviors in animals ), and chemistry (chemical changes and various other reactions occurring in our brain, and hence other parts of our body).

Psychology can also be considered therapeutic. For example, Freud used to study the underlying psychological causes and experiences an individual had gone through to learn about the reason for their mental illness, and thereby cure them. He felt that learning about the underlying cause would help people contemplate their fears, and thereby overcome them.

All in all, psychology was born due to the common ground in science and philosophy, and that the study of ourselves will help us understand society in a better way.
